if a man steals an ox or a sheep and
slaughters it or sells it he shall
restore five oxen for an ox and four
sheep for a sheep if the thief is found
breaking in and he is struck so that he
dies there shall be no guilt for his
bloodshed if the Sun has risen on him
there shall be guilt for his bloodshed
he should make full restitution if he
has nothing then he shall be sold for
his theft
if the theft is certainly found alive in
his hand
whether it is an ox or donkey or sheep
he shall restore double if a man causes
a field or vineyard to be grazed and
lets loose his animal and it feeds in
another man's field he shall make
restitution from the best of his own
field and the best of his own vineyard
if fire breaks out and catches in forms
so that stacked grain standing grain or
the field is consumed he who kindled the
fire shall surely make restitution if a
man delivers to his neighbor money or
articles to keep and it is stolen out of
the man's house if the thief is found he
shall pay double if the thief is not
found then the master of the house shall
be brought to the judges to see whether
he has put his hand into his neighbor's
gourds for any kind of trespass whether
it concerns an ox a donkey a sheep or
clothing or for any kind of lost thing
which another claims to be here's the
cause of both parties shall come before
the judges and whomever the judges
condemn shall pay double to his neighbor
if a man delivers to his neighbor a
donkey an ox a sheep or any animal to
keep and it dies is hurt or driven away
no one seeing it then an oath of the
Lord shall be between them both that he
has not put his hand into him
neighbors goods and the owner of it
shall accept that and he shall not make
it good but if in fact it is stolen from
him he shall make restitution to the
owner of it if it is torn to pieces by a
beast then he shall bring it as evidence
and he shall not make good what was torn
and if a man borrows anything from his
neighbor and it becomes injured or dies
the owner of it not being with it he
shall surely make it good if its owner
was with it he shall not make it good if
it was hired it came for its hire if a
man entices a virgin who is not
betrothed and lies with her he shall
surely pay the bride price for her to be
his wife
if her father utterly refuses to give
her to him he shall pay money according
to the bride price of virgins you shall
not permit a sorceress to live whoever
lies with an animal shall surely be put
to death he who sacrifices to any God
except to the Lord only he shall be
utterly destroyed you shall neither
mistreat a stranger nor oppress him for
you were strangers in the land of Egypt
you shall not afflict any widow or
fatherless child if you afflict them in
any way and they cry at all to me I will
surely hear their cry and my wrath will
become hot and I will kill you with the
sword your wives shall be widows and
your children fatherless if you lend
money to any of my people who are poorer
among you you shall not be like a
moneylender to him you shall not charge
him interest
if you ever take your neighbors garment
as a pledge you shall return it to him
before the Sun goes down for that is his
only covering it is his garment for his
skin
what will he sleep in and it will be
that when he cries to me I will hear for
I am gracious
you shall not revile God nor curse a
ruler of your people
you shall not delay to offer the first
of your ripe produce and your juices the
firstborn of your sons you shall give to
me likewise you shall do with your oxen
and your sheep it shall be with its
mother seven days on the eighth day you
shall give it to me and you shall be
holy men to me you shall not eat meat
torn by beasts in the field you shall
throw it to the dogs
you